# Chapter 8

## Philippe Pinel in the Twenty-First Century

### The Myth and the Message

Dora B. Weiner

### The Myth

The myth of Pinel, the Revolutionary republican “chainbreaker,” has been definitively discredited by historians.1 Yet today it is alive and well in France and abroad. Two novels have recently appeared that show the persistent hold of this myth on the French imagination. In Dans la nuit de Bicêtre [In the Darkness of Bicêtre] (Paris: Gallimard, 2006) Marie Didier invents an intimate relationship between Jean Baptiste Pussin, the “governor” of Pinel’s mental ward at Bicêtre Hospice and Dr. Jean Colombier, the royal inspector of hospitals and prisons. The only documented fact of a relationship between Colombier and Pussin is the presence of the inspector as Pussin’s sponsor at his marriage in 1786––indeed a surprising and hitherto unexplained discovery. Colombier’s humane Instructions for the management and treatment of the mentally ill, issued by Louis XVI’s government in 1785, are here said to have been devised––possibly dictated—by the unschooled but talented keeper of the 200 madmen on Pinel’s service. Didier even suggests that it was Pussin who single-handedly created “moral treatment” for the insane. This interpretation has unfortunately been anchored in Anglo-American history of medicine by Jan Goldstein’s characterization of Pinel (in an otherwise excellent book) as a “charlatan” using methods unworthy of a physician and scientist.2 Thus the claim to fame continues: Pussin performed the first physical act; Pinel heralded a world-wide emancipation. One intriguing sub-text of this controversy is the current championship of the nursing profession as the real caregivers of hospitalized patients, far out-performing the doctors who only appear for brief visits on the wards and never get to know the patient as a person.3 One might add that no one, in early nineteenthcentury France, thought of creating a lay nursing profession: Catholics were so used to the free services of the religious orders that organized professional nursing had to wait until the arrival of “nightingales” at the end of the century.4

Another recent book, frankly called a “novel,” by François Lelord, also focuses on the theme of liberation of the mentally ill. Liberté pour les insensés: Le roman de Philippe Pinel [Freedom for the Insane: The Tale of Philippe Pinel] (Paris: Odile Jacob, 2000) explores the relationship between Pinel and his friend, the famous philosopher, the marquis de Condorcet. We know that Pinel found safe lodgings for his friend in Paris, to shield him from the persecution of the Committee of Public Safety. According to Lelord, Condorcet found shelter within the walls of Bicêtre and we even learn from this tale that the doctor provided the fatal poison that allowed Condorcet to commit suicide. Was there a need to invent a “gentle Mathilda” to spice up the story?

305

A third author, the Paris psychiatrist Thierry Gineste, proposes the likely thought that we decorate our homes and offices in ways that reveal our personality. From the inventories after death required by French law he culled a list of the paintings and engravings that Pinel and his student Jean Marc Gaspard Itard, the teacher of the “Wild Boy of Aveyron,” affixed to their walls. Gineste analyzes these in Le lion de Florence: Sur l’imaginaire des fondateurs de la psychiatrie, Pinel et Itard [The Lion of Florence: The Fantasy-World of the Founders of Psychiatry, Pinel and Itard] (Paris: Albin Michel, 2004). We are not surprised to find the ancient physicians Hippocrates and Erasistratus pictured on the walls of Pinel’s apartments and study, nor the eleventh-century St. Bruno, the director of the cathedral school at Rheims and founder of the Carthusian order. What is surprising is Gineste’s interpretation that Pinel identified with patriarchs and saw himself as a modern Abraham, destined to lead his people of mental patients into the promised land of sanity. To do this, Pinel “created the asylum,” imposing “the barbarities of medical power.”5 Definite shades of Foucault!

### The Myth in Politics

The modern asylum is seen here as the nefarious creation of the Revolution. Such an opinion is not surprising among Frenchmen, since discussions of all aspects of modern French intellectual and social life eventually lead back to the great upheaval of 1789–1800, dividing Frenchmen into Right and Left. In the history of the asylum, it was the massive attack on medical power by Michel Foucault that led the assault in the 1960s,6 joining such critics and skeptics as R. D. Laing,7 Irving Goffman,8 Thomas Szasz,9 and Andrew Scull.10 In this context, critics see Pinel as an opportunist for whom the Revolution opened the door to a career. He presumably owed his post as physician at Bicêtre and the Salpêtrière not to his own talents and achievements, but to the maneuvers of his Ideologue friends (most of them Freemasons, which he was not). And he is scorned as a turncoat who successively served the republic, Napoleon, and the Bourbon Restoration. Gineste tells us that Pinel grew rich, bought a country house, just like other bourgeois upstarts who “lunged for the land” [se ruer sur la terre]. He created an inflexible Nosography that classified the mentally ill and he then applied this pattern to the asylum, diagnosing patients in order to confine them in the appropriate wards. Foucault characterized the asylum as a place surveyed from a panopticon where a “medical personage” ruled, where patients cowered in fear, realizing they were mad––a caricature of what Pinel tried to achieve.11

Taking issue with this highly critical attitude, the friends of the Revolution, the “Left,” did not remain idle. The majority of historians of medicine and psychiatry claim Pinel as a champion of humanitarian and democratic reform. Official French politics has supported this view.12 In 1849, under the Second Republic, the painting by Charles Müller, “Pinel Orders the Removal of Iron Shackles from the Insane Men at Bicêtre Hospice” was solemnly installed in the lobby of the National Academy of Medicine in Paris. There it towers, portraying a Pinel who orders a subordinate (presumably Pussin) to strike the shackles off the wrists of an old man, accompanied by an attentive disciple (who must be Esquirol––who never set foot in Bicêtre). Not to be outdone by its predecessor, the Third Republic ordered a painting of Pinel liberating the women of the Salpêtrière. Tony Robert-Fleury produced this well-known work in 1878: it hangs above the staircase of the Charcot Library at the Salpêtrière, badly lit, hard to see. The crowning effort of the Société médico-psychologique to honor the founder of psychiatry in France resulted in a statue of Pinel by Ludovic Durand erected near an entrance portal to the Salpêtrière. A recent effort to move the statue inside the hospice ground failed because the work was found to be too fragile to transfer. Paid for by public subscription, the statue portrays a youthful elegant man holding links of a broken chain. At his feet cower two young girls, overcome with emotion, looking up at him in surprised gratitude. Statues of Science and Bienfaisance flank the liberator. And to underscore the political meaning of the event, the Society unveiled the statue on 13 July 1885, thus linking the breaking of chains with the storming of the Bastille. There followed a Pinel stamp, a rue Pinel, a place Pinel, in Paris and elsewhere.

### The Birth of the Asylum

By the time of the French Revolution, the need for special public asylums for the destitute mentally ill was clear. To what extent did Pinel find such an asylum in existence when he arrived at the Salpêtrière in 1795? He counted 7,523 persons lodged in great confusion and was shocked by the lack of medical supervision. Traditionally, to care for the inmates, a director [supérieure] supervised some 30 headnurses (sœurs officières) and several hundred nurses aides and maids, while a manager (économe) administered the hotel functions of the hospice and 15 priests ministered to the patients’ spiritual welfare. Jointly they serviced some twenty wards [emplois] as well as the infirmary, prison, workrooms, kitchen, bakery, laundry, linen and clothing depots. Their shared authority led to frequent clashes. The sœurs’by-laws of 1692 empowered them to supervise physicians, surgeons and medications. They state: “The supérieure will obtain reports on the behavior of the servants to the insane and imbeciles to assure their moderation in the harsh and severe measures they sometimes must impose.” Thus a small hierarchy of capable women claimed to rule the Salpêtrière with absolute power over the patients.13The supérieure participated in regular meetings of the bureau of the General Hospital at the neighboring Pitié whose president ex officio was the archbishop of Paris: the role of physicians at the Salpêtrière was not among their major concerns. Typically, a recent Paris thesis analyzing the Salpêtrière under the old regime pays little attention to the inmates’medical condition. But the author acknowledges the “awakening” [prise de conscience] brought about by Pinel.14

Among the traditions and regulations of the old regime one can identify elements of the future asylum. One can extract information about the sisters and their activities from the manuscript folio registers of the Salpêtrière preserved in the Archives of the Assistance Publique in Paris. There are over one thousand such folios with detailed information, particularly of admissions and an especially intriguing series entitled “Mutations of the mentally ill women,” covering the years 1802–1805.15 “Mutation” here means change to new lodgings for the curable mental patients and, in this series, brief case histories can be found recorded in the margins. One can here see the sisters triaging the women sent to the Salpêtrière by the administration or brought in by the police, assigning them to the ward that seemed to them appropriate. They thus made a medical diagnosis. They would assign melancholics to the Fountain Court [cour des fontaines], the demented to the Oriental court [cour du Levant], violent patients to individual cells [loges], imbeciles to the upper floor, epileptics to the lower floor, and incurables to their own section. They also granted trial leaves of six weeks and three months, each permission being signed by a headnurse. Under the old regime, little boys would be sent to St. John’s or to Christ Child ward, pregnant women to St. Felicity, patients with paralyses or gout to St. Agatha, those with rheumatism to St. Dorothea, epileptics to St. Joan and women with periodic bouts of illness to the Holy Virgin. Names changed, but habits did not. The Revolution replaced the saints with numbers and the wards [emplois] with divisions and sections, but the classifications established by the sisters persisted; one must assume that Pinel approved of these subdivisions. The folios suggest that while certain sisters were made to retire after the arrival of Pinel in 1795 and Pussin in 1802, others, such as sisters Modeste, Justine, Madelon, Françoise and Marguerite spent their whole lives in the service of the mentally ill. Pinel and Pussin appreciated their experience and often adopted their administrative patterns.16

Of particular interest is the daily schedule, dictated, under the old regime, by the times for prayer prescribed by the Catholic religion. All French hospitals followed this sequence of the canonical hours. After the disestablishment of the Catholic Church, it seems that the schedule remained: why else would the nurses at the Hôtel-Dieu fight so bitterly against the surgeon who wanted to make early morning rounds? Here Michel Foucault’s idea, proposed in Discipline and Punish, surely holds true: he adduces the examples of the army, the seminary, the factory, the prison, and the hospital, showing how modern society regiments individuals. Thus Pinel’s asylum borrowed from the old regime not only the division of the asylum into many special wards, but the regular daily schedule that organized the patients’ lives. Did he “create the asylum?” What he added were plentiful possibilities of work for convalescents, his constant presence and careful medical supervision, and the bedside teaching of medicine and psychiatry.

### The Asylum and the Rights of the Citizen-Patient

Arriving at the Salpêtrière in the 1790s, Pinel viewed the asylum with the eyes of a physician, a natural scientist, a nosologist, a philanthropist and believer in the “Rights of Man.”17 The post of physician-in-chief was new, with ill-defined duties. This left him free to check on environmental aspects of hospital life affecting the patients’ health. We find him in the kitchen tasting the soup, in the laundry checking on the new mangle, welcoming a lightning rod placed on the roof of the church, and always stressing the need for cleanliness and order. At the same time his mind was filled with ideas about the new specialty, while he published his three books in quick succession: the Nosography (1798), the Treatise (1800), and Clinical Medicine (1802).

From their contents it is obvious that he consciously faced the challenge that confronts all democratic governments: how to provide health care for all the country’s citizens at a time when the needs of the hospitalized populations were rising to astronomically costly proportions. If democracy means equality, then this promise must include equal access to equally good care. The struggle with this commitment differentiates the early phase of psychiatry in France from contemporary developments in other Western countries. The French reflected and planned in national terms, more theoretical than practical: the ideas of the French Revolution, the nation’s debt to the citizen-patient, were never far from the planners’minds. The only other large-scale effort to serve the mentally ill was carried out, since the Reformation, by various Catholic nursing orders, led by the Brothers of Charity.18 On the other hand, secular individual initiatives were rare in France, compared to private or local experiments in psychiatric care attempted in Great Britain or in the Germanies. Few free-standing French psychiatric sanatoria have reached historians’ attention.

As he pondered the future of the asylum, a solid, scientific study seemed essential. Pinel therefore undertook an “experiment” of almost four years19: in phase one he re-examined the 569 mental patients hospitalized at the Salpêtrière in 1802; then he and his assistant carefully diagnosed all new arrivals. The aim was a statistical overview of over 1,000 patients that would allow projections and planning.20 Surveys and statistics were all the rage in Napoleonic France and so a record-taking in the General Hospital should not surprise us.21 Pinel added some personal reflections on the probability of cure for the mentally ill. He was obviously remembering the work of his friend Condorcet and he may have discussed these views with his fellow-academician Laplace.22

Several modern historians of medicine, including Sir Aubrey Lewis, and the philosopher Georges Canguilhem, were impressed by Pinel’s use of statistics and probability in clinical problems23; Ackerknecht calls him “the actual father of the numerical method in medicine.”24 One passage in the Traité that impressed several commentators as prescient reads:

To be authentic and conclusive and serve as a solid basis for a therapeutic method, an experiment must be conducted according to a fixed order. It must be based on a regular succession of carefully recorded observations repeated exactly for several years. It must fairly report the proportion of positive and failed results, all of which are instructive. It must therefore be based on the theory of probability which must henceforth be basic to medical therapies, if one is to provide them with a solid foundation.25 [italics mine]

When the “experiment” was complete, Pinel submitted a report to the Academy of Sciences––not to the medical faculty or the Paris Hospital Council. He wanted a prestigious and influential forum. The Academy acknowledged the report’s importance by voting that it be published in the Moniteur universel the subsequent Sunday. Four years later the main features of this report became part of the second edition of the Traité.26

What did this new orientation mean for the future of the asylum? How did the academicians respond? or the public? In fact, public response was very disappointing, at least in France.27 To stimulate interest, Pinel’s friend Jacques Louis Moreau de la Sarthe published a 71-page synopsis of the new Traité in the Moniteur universel in 1811–1812. “We are surprised to find,” he remarked, “that the most serious newspapers have failed to comment on the second edition of M. Pinel’s work on mental maladies.”28To no avail: the French public remained mum.

### The Psychiatric Profession in the Era of Realism

Pinel should have retired in 1810, at the age of 65, at the height of his prestige. His health was failing: unfortunately the extreme discretion of friends and colleagues and the lack of personal papers leave us but a faint hint of heart trouble. Then tragedy struck: in April 1811 Jean Baptiste Pussin died. He was exactly Pinel’s age. Two months later Pinel lost his wife, Jeanne Vincent. He replaced Pussin with Esquirol and he remarried in 1815––possibly because the management of two sons, Scipion, fifteen, and Charles, nine at their mother’s death, and two households, in Paris and Torfou, were more than he could manage. The official appointment of Dr. Esquirol as supervisor of the mentally ill women of the Salpêtrière has been hailed as the birthdate of the asylum by the brilliant French scholar Gladys Swain. One can see that 1811 marks, in many ways, the beginning of the end for Pinel.29

His prestige as a medical thinker was being attacked by a young generation buoyed by discoveries in pathological anatomy that explained diseases by the lesion of organs. While Pinel shared in the triumphs of the “Paris Clinical School” as a foremost teacher of clinical medicine, he distanced himself from pathological anatomy such as experiments in dissecting brains, even though he had studied and measured skulls and included 12 images of skulls in his Traité. Brilliant students criticized basic concepts of his nosology, beginning with the defense of G. L. Bayle’s thesis in 1802––Pinel being the sponsoring professor. Bayle successfully attacked a specific classification by Pinel into variety and specie, and the event was recorded by Bayle’s friend Laennec and later published.30 Then, in 1822, A. L. J. Bayle (the elder Bayle’s nephew) proffered the conclusive experiment that proved that tertiary syphilis––hitherto based solely on observations of patient behavior and some clinical symptoms—could now be diagnosed by a specific correlation of an alteration of the arachnoid membrane with a derangement of the mental faculties and an incomplete general paresis leading to death. Bayle’s research was undertaken at Charenton, where Esquirol was appointed director in 1826. The brain was becoming the center of researchers’ attention and the path toward biological psychiatry was opening.

In the meantime another student of Pinel’s, François Broussais (1772–1838), had launched a violent attack against the Nosography. He ridiculed the notion that fevers be considered as a nosologic category: in Pinel’s classification they rank as the first of six orders of diseases. This was old-fashioned theoretical thinking and, in fact, Pinel was the last of the Enlightenment’s nosologists.31 By the early nineteenth century, clinical research was producing so much specific medical knowledge that an overall classification of diseases was henceforth impossible. Pinel did not acknowledge the young generation’s protests: he reissued the Nosography in three volumes, in 1813, and again in 1818.

### Esquirol’s Power and Pinel’s Message

The political and cultural climate had changed in France. How the change affected psychiatry can be seen clearly in the career of Jean Etienne Dominique Esquirol (1772–1840), generally considered Pinel’s heir.32 Educated by the Brothers of the Christian Doctrine and at the collège de I’Esquille at Toulouse, like Pinel, he came to study medicine in Paris and was soon identified by Pinel as his most brilliant disciple. He opened a small private sanatorium next to the Salpêtrière in 1802, sponsored (and, it seems, partially financed) by Pinel. He came to the hospice regularly, attending the clinical lessons, where Pinel chose him to write the many patient histories that figure in Clinical Medicine published in 1802. But he did not become Pinel’s successor at the Salpêtrière, nor a professor at the faculty, nor a member of the Academy of sciences. One wonders why: it may well be that Pinel feared a rival.

Esquirol was a son of the Toulouse upper middle class, with monarchist sympathies and, during Napoleon’s Empire, he maintained connections with like-minded young men in the government. In 1810, 1814 and 1817 he undertook self-financed tours of all the asylums in France. The report he published in 1818 has remained famous as an indictment of the asylums’ abject condition.33 By then he had begun to teach a lecture course on psychiatry at the Salpêtrière which continued until 1825. At that time tension had been building between the reactionary Restoration ministry and the forward-looking members of the medical faculty. It erupted in 1822 when the government closed the faculty and put 11 senior professors who had served the Republic and Empire on emeritus status, at half pay. Pinel was thus dismissed at the age of 77. Esquirol became inspector of public education and, even though he lost that position when the July Monarchy came to power in 1830, he maintained his good relations with the government, becoming the main architect of the Law of 1838 which governs the internment of mentally ill patients to this day.

To bring about this Law, Esquirol had embarked on a 20-year effort planning the reform of asylums in all of France with members of the Paris Hospital Council, the Chamber of Deputies and the Chamber of Peers. From the beginning, Esquirol envisaged a national network of custodial institutions. He advocated medical control over the internment of the mentally ill, while the minister of internal affairs would appoint asylum superintendents and doctors. Such practical, political thinking was far from Pinel’s concern with salvaging curable patients for a normal social life. But it was in tune with the political philosophy of the July Monarchy that favored strong administrative power over France’s 86 departments.

Yet a serious hurdle remained before the Law of 1838 could be passed: the legal profession argued that the physician’s power to intern a mental patient amounted to a deprivation of civil rights. Ever since the middle ages, only a judge could declare a person non compos mentis and assign a guardian. Esquirol’s counter-argument was clever indeed: the doctor prescribed isolation, for medical and therapeutic reasons, and supervision was administrative, not judicial. And as for non compos mentis judgments, they only concerned financial matters and wealthy heirs (which was true). The indigent inmates of public asylums had never been targets of those lengthy legal proceedings. The Law passed, and isolation was accepted as a medical, not a legal matter.

The psychiatric profession closed ranks in those days. The French Société médico-psychologique began to publish its Annales in 1843 just as, in the United States, the Association of Medical Superintendants of American Institutions for the Insane began to issue the American Journal of Insanity (1844), the Germans their Allgemeine Zeitschrift für Psychiatrie (1844), and the English the Journal of Mental Science (1855). Medical school chairs in psychiatry followed in the 1880s, and soon International congresses: the psychiatric profession now had a national and international playing field.

But what of its medical philosophy? Some critics now remembered Pinel, for exemple Henri Ellenberger (1905–1993) in his Discovery of the Unconscious (1970), hailed by Henri Ey (1900–1977),34 and by the brilliant Gladys Swain, tragically dead at 48.35 These psychiatrists all stressed the psychologic aspects of mental illness and shared Pinel’s insight that a remnant of reason subsists in the deranged person, and that a skilled therapist can reach this remnant of humanity so as to strengthen and possibly cure the patient. The philosopher Hegel had pointed out the originality of Pinel’s concept as early as 1817, arguing that Pinel deserved “the highest recognition for his services.”36 And the contemporary philosopher Marcel Gauchet summed up Swain’s work in a preface to a new edition of her thesis entitled “From Pinel to Freud” and in “Dialogue avec I’insensé.” Gauchet and Swain see two pivotal moments in the history of psychiatry: around 1800, owing to Pinel’s formulation of “mental alienation” and around 1900, owing to Freud’s creative insights.37

These historians all see in Pinel a physician who, more than any other, transformed the “mad” into mentally ill patients for whom doctors must care. He thus broadened the province of medicine to include a new field of activity, eventually called “psychiatry.”

### Notes and References

- 1. For more details see Dora B. Weiner, Comprendre et soigner: Philippe Pinel et la médecine de l’esprit (Paris: Fayard, 1999), 136. An English version is now in preparation. Tentatively entitled “Observe and Heal: The Origins of Psychiatry in the French Revolution,” it is meant for the series “The History of Medicine in Context,” published by Ashgate.
- 2. Jan Goldstein, Console and Classify: The French Psychiatric Profession in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987), chapter 3 “The transformation of charlatanism, or the moral treatment.”

- 3. For a well-documented argument by an advocate of the psychiatric nursing profession, see Jack Juchet, “JeanBaptiste Pussin, ‘médecin des folles,’” Soins psychiatrie, 1992, No. 142–143, 46–54 and Jack Juchet and Jacques Postel, “Le ‘surveillant’ Jean-Baptiste Pussin,” Histoire des sciences médicates, 1996, 30 (2): 189–198. Juchet totally discounts Pinel’s theoretical formulations, classifications and famous case histories, dwelling only on his appreciation of Pussin’s skills.
- 4. See Dora B. Weiner, “The French Revolution, Napoleon and the Nursing Profession,” Bulletin of the History of Medicine, 1972, 46(3): 274–305.
- 5. Thierry Gineste, in Le lion de Florence: Sur l’imaginaire des fondateurs de la psychiatrie, Pinel et Itard (Paris: Albin Michel, 2004), 17–18.
- 6. Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason, Engl. tr (New York: Random House, 1973); idem, The Birth of the Clinic: An Archeology of Medical Perception, Engl. tr (New York: Random House, 1975); idem, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, Engl tr. (New York: Random House, 1977).
- 7. R. D. Laing, The Divided Self: An Existential Study in Sanity and Madness (London: Penguin, 1960).
- 8. Erving Goffman, Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1961).
- 9. Thomas Szasz, The Myth of Mental Illness: Foundations of a Theory of Personal Conduct (New York: HoeberHarper, 1961) and idem, The Manufacture of Madness: A Comparative Study of the Inquisition and the Mental Health Movement (New York: Harper & Row, 1970).
- 10. Andrew Scull, Museums of Madness: The Social Organization of Insanity in Nineteenth-Century England (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1979).
- 11. Foucault, “The Birth of the Asylum” chapter 9 of Madness and Civilization.
- 12. For details, see Dora B. Weiner, “Le geste de Pinel: The History of a Psychiatric Myth,” in Mark S. Micale and Roy Porter, eds., Discovering the History of Psychiatry (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994), 232–247.
- 13. See “Recueil de règlements intérieurs concemant l’hôpital de la Salpêtrière,” esp. ms. # 70, Bibliothèque historique de la Ville de Paris. See Dora B. Weiner, “Les femmes de la Salpêtrière: Trois siècles d’histoire hospitalière parisienne” Gesnerus: Swiss Journal of the History of Medicine and Science, 1995, 52: 20–39.
- 14. Jean-Pierre Carrez, “Le régime intérieur de la Salpêtrière de Paris,” Revue de la Société française d’Histoire des Hôpitaux, 2003, 110(2): 17–22.
- 15. Archives de l’Assistance Publique/Hoˆpitaux de Paris; Archives hospitalie`res. Salpˆetrie`re. See especially Registres d’entrée series 1Q2 Mutations de femmes aliénées, 6Q5 1–4.
- 16. See Weiner, Comprendre et soigner, chapter 6 “Les transformations de la Salpêtrière.”
- 17. For context, see Dora B. Weiner, The Citizen-Patient in Revolutionary and Imperial Paris (Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993).
- 18. See Dora B. Weiner, “The Brothers of Charity and the Mentally Ill in Pre-Revolutionary France,” Social History of Medicine, 1989, 2: 321–337.
- 19. Dora B. Weiner, “Observe and Heal: Philippe Pinel’s Experiment at Salpêtrière Hospice, 1802–1805,” in Eric J. Engstrom, Matthias Weber and Paul Hoff, eds., Knowledge and Power: Perspectives in the History of Psychiatry (Berlin: Verlag für Wissenschaft und Bildung, 1999), 25–43.
- 20. Actually, the term “numerical” would be more accurate, since the record-taking at that time lacked the sophistication of statistical analysis. I thank my colleague Theodore Porter for this observation.
- 21. Jean Claude Perrot, L’Age d’or de la statistique régionale française (An IV-1804) (Paris: Société des Etudes Robespierristes, 1977), Marie Noëlle Bourguet, Déchiffrer la France: La statistique départementale à l’époque napoléonienne (Paris: Editions des archives contemporaines, 1988) and Andrea Alice Rusnock, Vital Accounts: Quantifying Health and Population in 18th-Century England and France (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002); Terence D. Murphy, “Medical Knowledge and Statistical Methods in Early Nineteenth-Century France,” Medical History, 1982, 25: 301–319 and Eduard Rudolf Müllener, “Zur methodischen therapeutisch-klinischen Forschung der Ecole de Paris, 1800–1850,” Gesnerus, 1966, 23: 122–131.
- 22. Roger Hahn, the expert on Laplace, comments that “Laplace was interested in all applications of probability theory to social phenomena (demography, sex-differences at birth, fairness on the electoral process, insurance, mortality tables, etc.), but not [to my knowledge] in issues of disease or health.” (Personal communication.)
- 23. Sir Aubrey Lewis, “Philippe Pinel and the English,” The State of Psychiatry, Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 1955, 48: 581–586; Georges Canguilhem, “Le statut épistémologique de la médecine” History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences, 1988, 10 (Supplement), 15–29.

- 24. Erwin H. Ackerknecht, Medicine at the Paris Hospital, 1794–1848 (Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1967), 48.
- 25. Pinel, Traité, 2ème éd., § 323.
- 26. The text of Pinel’s report corresponds, with slight changes, to section VI of the Traité of 1809, “Results of Observations and Composition of Tables to Determine the Probability of Cure of the Insane.”
- 27. For an assessment of the public response to publication of the second edition of the Traité in 1809, see the “Prologue” by Jean Garrabé and Dora B. Weiner to the recent reissue of this book (Paris: Les empêcheurs de tourner en rond/Seuil, 2005), 7–60. The response in Ibero-America was prompt and long-lasting. See a forthcoming study, “Psychiatry Comes to the Americas: a Global Perspective.”
- 28. Jacques Louis Moreau de la Sarthe,. Fragments pour servir à l’histoire de la médecine des maladies mentales et de la médecine morale (Paris: n.p., 1812), 1–71.
- 29. For a ground-breaking analysis, see Marcel Gauchet and Gladys Swain, Madness and Democracy: The Modern Psychiatric Universe, tr. Catherine Porter, intr. Jerrold Seigel (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999).
- 30. In A. L. G. Baryle and A. J. Thillaye, eds., Biographie médicale par ordre chronologique, 2 vols, (Paris: Delahaye, 1855), 890–892.
- 31. The Dictionnaire des sciences médicales comments: “ ... within ten years [Broussais] made Pinel’s Nosography age by a century.” (1869, 1: 16) Cited by Ackerknecht, Medicine at the Paris Hospital, 62. See also Esther Fischer-Homberger. “Eighteenth-Century Nosology and its Survivors,” Medical History, 1970, 14: 397–403.
- 32. The following passsage relies on Goldstein, Console and Classify for many details. See, esp. chapter 4 “The Politics of Patronage.”
- 33. For a detailed version, see Esquirol’s article “Maisons d’aliénés,” Dictionnaire des sciences médicales. (1818) 30: 47–95.
- 34. Henry F. Ellenberger, The Discovery of the Unconscious. The History and Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry (New York: Basic Books, 1970); see also Mark S. Micale, ed., Beyond the Unconscious: Essays of Henri F. Ellenberger in the History of Psychiatry (Princeton University Press, 1993). Henri Ey did not live to complete his “History of Psychiatry within the History of Medicine”; among his many writings relevant to this topic are “A propos de La Découverte de l’Inconscient de H. F. Ellenberger,” Evolution psychiatrique, 1972, 36: 227–270.
- 35. See Gladys Swain’s thesis, Le sujet de la folie (Toulousse: Privat, 1977).
- 36. Georg Friedrich Wilhelm Hegel, “Philosophie des Geistes,” in F. Nicolin and O. Poggeler, eds., Part III of Encyclopedie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (1830) (Hamburg: Meiner, 1969), 338.
- 37. Gauchet, “De Pinel à Freud,” in Le sulet de la folie (Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1994), and ‘Dialogue avec l’insensé’ par Gladys Swain précédé de ‘A la recherche d’une autre histoire de la folie’ par Marcel Gauchet (Paris: Gallimard, 1994). For an English translation of their work, see Madness and Democracy, Tr. Catherine Porter, 1999).
