# 2

Porter versus Foucault on the ‘Birth of the Clinic’

Adrian Wilson

Texts and contexts

It is well known that Roy Porter’s oeuvre in the history of psychiatry was partly stimulated by, and in no small measure pitched against, Michel Foucault’s Madness and Civilization (Folie et déraison). But what was Porter’s response to Foucault’s Birth of the Clinic (Naissance de la clinique)?1 By the ‘birth of the clinic’, let us recall, Foucault referred to the remarkable change in medicine that took place in the Paris École de Santé between 1800, when Xavier Bichat’s Traité des membranes initiated his new doctrine of tissues, which rapidly invigorated pathological anatomy, and 1817, when René-Théophile-Hyacinthe Laennec (1781–1826), one of the most influential pupils of the new school and himself a master of pathological anatomy, invented the stethoscope. Foucault himself, as we shall see, regarded this as the most important transformation in Western medicine’s entire history, and although not all commentators would go this far, none would deny that pathological anatomy made giant strides in the Paris school, or that the stethoscope gave an unprecedented impulse to physical examination, with permanent effects. Thus we are dealing here with a momentous set of events, which means that Porter’s view of Birth of the Clinic is of considerable interest.

If we concentrate on the directly corresponding passage in The Greatest Benefit to Mankind we find considerable harmony, for with respect to physical examination, Porter seems to have been persuaded by Foucault’s version of events.2 But when it comes to the other dimension of la clinique, namely the development of pathological anatomy, Porter’s account was radically different from Foucault’s. The way in which this becomes apparent is in their respective treatments of Bichat’s precursors, notably – though not only – Giovanni Battista Morgagni, author of the monumental De Sedibus et Causis Morborum per Anatomen Indagatis (1761). This could be brought out using the appropriate passage from Greatest Benefit itself;3 but it is simpler to use for this purpose another Porter work of the 1990s, part of his contribution to the collectively authored The Western Medical Tradition, in which Porter was responsible for the chapter on the eighteenth century.

In this chapter, therefore, I shall juxtapose two texts – Foucault’s Birth of the Clinic (mainly, though not only, its Preface) and Porter’s discussion of eighteenth-century ‘Pathology’ (by which he meant pathological anatomy) in The Western Medical Tradition.4 We shall see that these display both a systematic divergence and a subtle and surprising agreement, and that in each respect the Foucault/Porter comparison is emblematic of wider historiographical trends.

## Foucault’s picture

As I have remarked elsewhere, Foucault depicted the ‘birth of the clinic’ as a step from non-knowledge to knowledge.5 The corollary of this, or indeed its prerequisite, was that the transition from the old medicine to the new was portrayed as a discontinuous development. Yet this fundamental posited discontinuity was never argued; rather, it was installed rhetorically, by the devices of metaphor and selective exemplification.

### Metaphor

The very title Naissance de la clinique was, of course, a metaphor of discontinuity; further metaphors of this kind proliferated throughout Foucault’s Preface, which invoked in turn a ‘sharp line’, a ‘moment’, a ‘mutation in discourse’ and a ‘turning-point’;6 and last but not least, the climax of the book – a passage that I shall have occasion to examine later – spoke of ‘the great break in the history of Western medicine’.7 These multiple metaphorical resources (birth, line, moment, mutation, turning-point, break) range across the living and the non-living, the spatial and the temporal, the physical and the mathematical, but they have this in common, that each of them is an image of discontinuity.

### Exemplification

The governing structure of Naissance de la clinique was set up in the Preface by means of a contrast between two texts, from 1769 and 1825, both concerned with ‘membranes’ but in very different ways: the first by Pierre Pomme (1735–1812), recounting a treatment for hysteria which caused ‘membranous tissues’ to be expelled from various bodily orifices; the second by Antoine-Laurent-Jesse Bayle (1799–1858), describing the meninges of the brain. According to Foucault’s gloss, Pomme ‘speaks to us in the language of fantasy’, whereas in the work of Bayle and his contemporaries ‘language has turned into rational discourse’, making it ‘possible for the patient’s bed to become a field of scientific investigation’. A little later in the Preface Foucault introduces another contrast, whose purpose is slightly different but whose structure is the same: here J. F. Meckel (1724–74), weighing portions of the brain in 1764, is counterposed to Bichat and his contemporaries (roughly simultaneous with Bayle), who examined the brain in qualitative terms. The effect of this twofold comparison is to install as representatives of mid-eighteenth-century medicine the forgotten figures of Pomme and Meckel, and conversely to depict ‘medicine as a clinical science’ as beginning with Bichat, Bayle et al. – that is, in the early nineteenth century.8 But the force of all this hinges on the choice of the examples, as can be indicated by a thought-experiment: imagine replacing Pomme and Meckel with their contemporaries Morgagni (1682–1771) and Leopold Auenbrugger (1722–1809) and the entire contrast collapses. For as Foucault half-acknowledges elsewhere in the book (I shall touch on this in due course), the grand themes which defined la clinique – pathological anatomy and physical examination – had already flourished in the 1760s, when Morgagni published his incomparable De Sedibus and Auenbrugger announced his discovery of thoracic percussion. No wonder, therefore, that the Preface (and, for that matter, most of the book) rigorously excludes Morgagni and Auenbrugger, and a fortiori Morgagni’s teacher Antonio Maria Valsalva (1666–1723) and his seventeenth-century predecessors such as Johann Jacob Wepfer (1620–95, author of the classic work on cerebral haemorrhage) and Théophile Bonet (1620–89, compiler of the 1679 Sepulchretum, a massive digest of cases and autopsies): the achievements of these individuals contradict the very premises of Foucault’s argument.

## Porter’s picture

Porter, in sharp contrast, depicts the development with which he is concerned – pathological anatomy – as a continuous process with a protracted history. Yet his radically different picture has this in common with Foucault’s: that its literary form is perfectly attuned to its content. The simplest way to bring this out is to inspect the key points of the story as Porter tells it:

Since Vesalius, the idea had grown that the good practitioner must be proficient in gross anatomy. An inevitable consequence was that increased attention began to be paid to the connexions between the sick body and the disease signs afforded by the corpse. Anatomy, in other words, paved the way for morbid anatomy

The trail was blazed by Morgagni . Building on earlier necropsy studies by Wepfer and Bonet Morgagni published in 1761 his De Sedibus et Causis Morborum (On the Sites and Causes of Disease)

In De Sedibus, Morgagni demonstrated that disease symptoms tally with anatomical lesions . It was Morgagni who thus finally clinched the direct relevance of anatomy to clinical medicine

Others continued his work. In 1793, Matthew Baillie published his Morbid Anatomy .

Pathology became more fully systematised with the publication in 1800 of the Traité des Membranes (Treatise on Membranes) by Bichat As developed by Morgagni, pathology had dealt with organs. Bichat changed the focus [to the tissues] .

Around 1800 thanks to developments in pathology, attention was newly being paid to normal and abnormal structures and functions, a trend that would come to fruition in the nineteenth century.

Again there are two rhetorical elements in play, which it is convenient to treat in the opposite order from that which I used for Foucault.

### Exemplification

Porter deploys a very different cast of characters from that used by Foucault. Not only does he begin with Andreas Vesalius (1514–64), thereby giving pathological anatomy a vastly extended lineage; he also makes Morgagni his key eighteenth-century character, with the effect that the medicine of the nineteenth century is linked with that of the eighteenth, rather than separated from it as in Foucault’s picture. In addition there are several other individuals who, so to speak, fill up the historical spaces: Wepfer and Bonet stand for the seventeenth century, Matthew Baillie (1761–1823) for the late eighteenth. Finally, at the very end of the story, comes Bichat – the solitary point of overlap with Foucault’s picture, an overlap which is no accident, for Bichat was the individual in whom Foucault located the origin of modern medicine, as we shall see.

### A vocabulary of continuity

The very presence of Porter’s temporally extended cast list – Vesalius, Wepfer, Bonet, Morgagni, Baillie, Bichat – conveys a message of continuity. But more than this, whereas Foucault separated the characters of his non-story, Porter systematically connects them; and the way that he does so is consistently through a rhetoric of continuity. In the opening and closing phases of the story that rhetoric is largely metaphorical – idea had grown, paved the way, trail was blazed, building on, come to fruition; in the heart of the passage, that is to say when dealing with the eighteenth century, Porter abandons metaphorical language and uses direct representation: continued his work, became more fully systematized. Yet both forms of writing achieve the same effect, namely, continuity – the precise opposite of what Foucault had constructed with his panoply of metaphors.

In short, where Foucault depicted discontinuity, Porter installed a continuous story. And this disagreement is by no means confined to these two authors, for much the same contrast is to be found between the writings of Russell Maulitz (who treats pathology as effectively beginning with the Paris school, apart from a nod to Morgagni) and Othmar Keel (who has argued vigorously against Foucault’s claims for the novelty of the Paris school).9

## A hidden consensus

Thus far it appears that the stories told by Foucault and Porter have nothing in common, apart from their unsurprising convergence on the figure of Bichat and of course their considerable rhetorical mastery. Yet I shall now suggest that between those stories there subsists a subtle and interesting agreement, one that resides not so much in what they say as in what they tend to exclude.

The theme that I have in mind is the project of relating postmortem findings to the prior symptoms of the living patient. Let us first notice that by the time of la clinique that project was well over two centuries old. It had already been attempted quite commonly, albeit occasionally, in the sixteenth century;10 it was formulated explicitly by Francis Bacon in 160511 and was pursued by many seventeenth-century medical men, among them Wepfer and Bonet; in the eighteenth century it was carried forward with particular rigour by Morgagni, whose efforts show, incidentally, how complex and difficult this undertaking was.12 And in the epoch of la clinique this same project was attested, appropriately enough, by both Bichat and Laennec – the one the effective founder of the morbid anatomy which flourished in the Paris school, the other the begetter of that school’s crowning invention, the stethoscope. Here is how Bichat, writing in 1801, depicted the future of pathological anatomy (with my emphases):13

It seems to me that we have reached an epoch in which morbid anatomy is bound to experience a new and rapid development. This science is not only that of the organic derangements which arrive slowly, as principals or as sequelae, in chronic illnesses; [rather] it consists of the examination of all the alterations which the parts can experience, at whatever stage their illnesses are examined. Thus apart from certain fevers and nervous affections, almost everything in pathology is within the competence of this science. How slight are the reasonings of famous physicians when we examine them not in their books, but in the dead body! Medicine was long excluded from the circle of the exact sciences; it will have the right to be associated with them, at least in respect of diagnostics, when rigorous observation [sc.: of symptoms] is everywhere united with the examination of the alterations suffered by the organs. This direction is beginning to be taken by all reasonable minds; it will without doubt soon become general. What is observation, if we are ignorant of the place where the evil is seated? For twenty years from morning to evening you have taken notes at the bedside of patients, on the affections of the heart, the lung, the gastric viscera, etc., and all is confusion for you in the symptoms, which, having no common connection, exhibit only a series of incoherent phenomena. Open some cadavers, and you will soon see disappearing the obscurity which observation alone could not have dispelled.

For Bichat, then, morbid anatomy alone was not a sufficient basis for bringing medicine into ‘the circle of the exact sciences’; rather, it had to ‘be united with’ the observation of disease in the living patient. And some ten years later, by which time Bichat’s vision had already been realized in Paris by Jean-Nicolas Corvisart (1755–1821, the reviver of Auenbrugger’s percussion) and many others, Laennec made much the same point (emphases mine):14

Pathological anatomy is a science whose aim is the knowledge of the visible alterations produced on the organs of the human body by the state of disease. The opening up of corpses is the means of acquiring this knowledge; but in order for it to become of direct use it must be joined to observation of the symptoms or alterations of functions that coincide with each alteration in the organs.

In short, both Bichat and Laennec proclaimed that morbid anatomy was not enough on its own, but had to be ‘united’ or ‘joined’ with the study of symptoms in the living patient. This is all the more striking when it is remembered that these two men were, at least in the judgement of posterity, the most eminent practitioners of morbid anatomy produced by the Paris school. Yet at the same time their formulations betray a curious omission or elision: neither of them made explicit what was in fact the precondition for linking symptomatology with pathological anatomy, namely that the same individual be studied first when alive (as a patient) and then when dead (as a corpse).15 This oversight, I suggest, was no accident, but rather reflected the inherent difficulty of the subject: just as the enterprise of linking postmortem findings with prior symptoms presented an immense challenge both practically and conceptually (as the work of Morgagni vividly attests), so also the theorization of that enterprise – the articulation of what it involved – was a troublesome task in its own right. For instance, this activity had no identifiable locus within the medical disciplinary matrix: it was connected with all three of pathology (the theory of disease), pathological anatomy and the observation of symptoms, but could not be subsumed within any of these.

How has this theme – the integration of postmortem findings with prior symptoms – been figured by Foucault and by Porter? We anticipate, of course, that Foucault will depict it (falsely) as the sudden product of the Paris school, whereas Porter will (correctly) give it an extended lineage, and this expectation is indeed borne out; yet as will emerge, their formulations also display an unexpected harmony.

Naissance de la clinique engages with the matter in chapter 8, which deals with what Foucault calls ‘the age of Bichat’16 and is entitled – significantly, as we shall see – ‘Open up a few corpses’ (Ouvrez quelques cadavres). A measure of the importance of this chapter is that it is precisely here that Foucault announces, in a phrase that I noted earlier, ‘the great break in the history of Western medicine’.17 It is appropriate to consider the chapter as a whole in order to see how my theme (which appears almost halfway through) is introduced.

The opening section of the chapter elaborates two theses in turn, the first historiographic, the second substantive. The historiographic argument is pitched against a longstanding medical myth: that before the Paris clinic, pathological anatomy had been held back by ‘the opposition of religion, morality, and stubborn prejudice to the opening up of corpses’.18 In rebutting that myth Foucault has to invoke the very figures that his Preface had so carefully suppressed: Bonet, Valsalva, Morgagni and Auenbrugger.19 But the discontinuity constructed by the Preface is reinstated through Foucault’s next, substantive claim: that the pathological anatomy initiated by Bichat was different in kind from Morgagni’s. In place of ‘the densities of the organs’ investigated by Morgagni, Bichat substituted what Foucault calls ‘the thinness of the tissue’: that is, ‘volumes’ were replaced by ‘surfaces’.20 And this leads Foucault to the pivotal thesis of his book: that this new focus on ‘tissual surfaces’ made it possible to transfer the nosographic project of the late eighteenth century, based on Condillac’s ‘method of analysis’, from the universe of symptoms – another ‘surface’, but a surface of a very different type – into the physical body.21 This claim is rich in implications, both benign and baleful. On the one hand, it has the great virtue of making intelligible the fact (overlooked by some other commentators, including Porter) that the new, tissue-based pathological anatomy initiated by Bichat was entirely consistent with the continuation of the nosographical project.22 On the other hand, it permits Foucault to advance a new myth of his own making, one which stands as the precise substitute for the one he had refuted a few pages earlier: that only now, in the ‘age of Bichat’, was pathological anatomy related to prior symptoms.23 Accordingly, the remainder of the chapter is devoted to the ways that Bichat and his immediate successors – Corvisart, GaspardLaurent Bayle (uncle of Antoine-Laurent-Jesse Bayle, whom Foucault had used in his Preface), Laennec, Petit, Bouillaud – handled this (supposedly novel) task of relating postmortem findings to antecedent symptoms in the living patient.

Foucault depicts that task as presenting two aspects:24 the integration of the spatial (anatomy) with the temporal (symptoms); and the need to overcome the distorting effect of postmortem changes, which confuse the significance of what is found at autopsy. Notice that this analysis drastically reduces the scope of the problem – for neither of these formulations begins to capture the awful and ineffable gulf that separates the dead body, which knows no pain and neither feels nor speaks, from the living, breathing, suffering patient. Nevertheless, that problem is initially in focus, as is signalled by the fact that Foucault here includes Laennec’s injunction (which I reproduced above) that pathological anatomy has to be ‘joined to observation of the symptoms or alterations of functions that coincide with each alteration in the organs’. Yet as Foucault’s discussion proceeds (by way of an elegant meditation on death in the writings of Bichat, supplemented by those of Bayle and Laennec), the problem gradually slips out of view,25 until it is finally erased in the punchline of the chapter – the very passage which announces ‘the great break in the history of Western medicine’. For here Foucault quotes from Bichat’s view of morbid anatomy, just as he had earlier quoted that of Laennec, but in doing so he omits Bichat’s requirement that ‘the examination of the alterations that our organs suffer’ should be ‘everywhere united with’ the ‘rigorous observation’ of patients’ symptoms:26

the great break in the history of Western medicine dates precisely from the moment clinical experience became the anatomico-clinical gaze. Pinel’s Médicine clinique dates from 1802 the rules of analysis seem to triumph in the pure decipherment of symptomatic totalities. But a year before, Bichat had relegated them to history:

for twenty years, from morning to night, you have taken notes at patients’ bedsides on affections of the heart, the lungs, the gastric viscera, and all is confusion for you in the symptoms which, refusing to yield up their meaning, offer you a succession of incoherent phenomena. Open up a few corpses: you will dissipate at once the darkness that observation alone could not dissipate.

The living night is dissipated in the brightness of death.

The elegance of Foucault’s concluding paraphrase should not blind us to the fact that we have been robbed: for the effect of this selective quotation is to obliterate Bichat’s recognition of the need to unite postmortem findings with the observation of symptoms. And it can now be seen that the chapter’s title is faithful to its trajectory: the injunction ‘open up a few corpses’ conveys precisely half, but only half, of what Bichat had in fact enjoined. Thus the effect of the chapter, ironically enough, is to eliminate from view the very activity which Foucault himself has claimed distinguished la clinique from all that went before it, namely the integrating of symptoms with anatomy.27

Turning to our Porter text we find the same suppression but in a different form, corresponding to the fact that Porter – quite rightly, and in radical opposition to Foucault – depicts anatomico-symptomatic correlation as a longstanding activity. What happens here is that this theme repeatedly enters and then disappears, submerged within the figure of pathological anatomy. This movement takes place at the very outset:

Since Vesalius, the idea had grown that the good practitioner must be proficient in gross anatomy. An inevitable consequence was that increased attention began to be paid to the connexions between the sick body and the disease signs afforded by the corpse. Anatomy, in other words, paved the way for morbid anatomy.

Here the living patient has been introduced in the form of ‘the sick body’, and Porter rightly points to the ‘connexions’ between this and ‘the disease signs afforded by the corpse’; yet in the very next sentence all of this is lost, for the focus shifts to the mere corpse (‘morbid anatomy’). And precisely the same transmutation takes place at the key moment of the passage, that is to say, in the discussion of Morgagni and his impact. Porter’s account of Morgagni’s De Sedibus is admirably explicit as to the importance within that work of anatomico-symptomatic correlation:

In De Sedibus, Morgagni demonstrated that disease symptoms tally with anatomical lesions . It was Morgagni who thus finally clinched the direct relevance of anatomy to clinical medicine.

Yet this insight is instantly cancelled in what follows. For as an example of those who ‘continued’ Morgagni’s work, Porter offers Matthew Baillie – whose Morbid Anatomy in fact contained no case histories, and in its original edition (1793) did not even mention symptoms.28 Thus the price of assimilating Morgagni to Baillie is neither more nor less than the elimination of anatomico-symptomatic correlation as a significant dimension of Morgagni’s enterprise. And this is the same contradiction (mutatis mutandis) which we have seen at the climax of Foucault’s Birth of the Clinic.

Whence this shared elision? I suggest that it reflects the inherently recalcitrant nature of the matter in question. We saw earlier that anatomicosymptomatic correlation was extremely difficult to carry out; that it cut across medicine’s internal boundaries, involving at least three different areas and therefore falling into none of them; and moreover that this activity resisted theorization, for even Bichat and Laennec fell short of articulating fully what it entailed. The fact that Foucault and Porter, from their very different perspectives, have both written out this theme can be regarded as the historiographic echo of this same difficulty: that is, the activity of relating symptoms to post-mortem findings has been as difficult for historians to grasp as it was for early modern medical men to practise and to theorise. Similarly, neither Maulitz nor Keele has brought anatomico-symptomatic correlation into focus; instead, for all their disagreement, they are united in taking ‘pathology’ as their theme.29

## Conclusion

The convergence that we have just been noting makes all the more remarkable the contrast with which we began – between Foucault’s discontinuity picture and Porter’s story of continuity. By way of conclusion, I want to suggest that neither of these accounts is sufficient in itself, and yet each of them captures a very important aspect of the problem. That is to say, there was indeed a sudden shift, as Foucault would have it, yet that shift had profound roots in earlier medical practices, as Porter claims.

We can reconcile the two pictures in this way if we posit that the activity of anatomico-symptomatic correlation, though it had often been attempted, attained a new level of success in the context of the Paris Ecole de Santé. And there are indeed good grounds for believing that this is the case. The earlier attempts of course require an extended discussion, for which there is not space here; but what can be said in a brief compass is that connecting symptoms with postmortem findings was an extraordinarily difficult enterprise, far more demanding than normal anatomy. Even for just a single illness it required at an absolute minimum: (a) observation and recording of the living patient’s symptoms; (b) the death of the patient (this is by no means trivial, for even in early modern medicine most patients survived most of their illnesses); (c) the opportunity to dissect the body; (d) not just one such patient-and-corpse but many of them, because both symptoms and post-mortem findings were complex and variable; and finally (e) a rigorous method for collating the results. And it turns out that this combination of conditions was seldom satisfied: for instance, in eighteenth-century England most hospital patients survived (because the hospitals selected patients as curable), while conversely many and perhaps most anatomized bodies came with no record of symptoms (because corpses for teaching were probably secured by grave-robbing). The effect of such constraints was exactly as if there had existed either the supposed taboo on dissection (the myth demolished by Foucault) or the failure to attempt anatomico-symptomatic correlation (the alternative myth which Foucault installed). But in the Paris Ecole de Santé, these constraints were broken – not because this had been intended, but simply as a result of the fortuitous triple combination of practices and circumstances that emerged there. In the first place, hospital patients were used as clinical teaching material on an unprecedented scale. Second, it so happened that these hospitals were places of very high mortality. And third, from 1798 the bodies of those same patients were made available to anatomy teachers – initially purely for normal anatomy, which is all that the formal curriculum envisaged. The effect of this conjunction was that the preconditions for anatomico-symptomatic correlation were satisfied in the Paris Ecole to an unprecedented degree: hence the activities and achievements of Bichat, Corvisart, Laennec and their contemporaries.

If in this respect Foucault’s picture of discontinuity is accurate, we should also recall that Porter’s continuity story has a powerful element of truth; and it is appropriate, in a volume of this kind, to give Porter the last word. Let us therefore go back once more to the beginning of our little Porter passage:

Since Vesalius, the idea had grown that the good practitioner must be proficient in gross anatomy. An inevitable consequence was that increased attention began to be paid to the connexions between the sick body and the disease signs afforded by the corpse. Anatomy, in other words, paved the way for morbid anatomy

In thus launching his continuist picture, Porter captured a crucial element of seventeenth-century anatomy, and one which has strangely been marginalized by the specialist historians of anatomy. For the nub of his argument was that pathological anatomy was neither a new development in the eighteenth century nor a separate enterprise from normal anatomy, but rather an integral part of anatomy as such; and there is every reason to believe that this picture is correct. The historians of seventeenth-century anatomy have tended to overlook this by implicitly (and without discussion) defining ‘anatomy’ as ‘normal anatomy’;30 but the anatomists of the seventeenth century (and to some degree at least those of the sixteenth as well) deployed a broader definition of anatomy, one which included what would later become the specialism of pathological anatomy. For bringing this out, as for so much else, Roy Porter – a historian of the eighteenth century, telling us something of profound importance about an earlier period – deserves our permanent gratitude.
