## 1 Puzzles of Mental Illness

[In ancient Israel] it was proposed that a person who wandered about alone at night, who spent the night in a cemetery, or who tore his garments and destroyed what was given to him might be considered deranged—if such behavior appeared irrational. However, it was pointed out that otherwise normal persons could also behave in this way, e.g. one who spent the night in a cemetery might have done so to practice magic, or that another who tore his clothes might have done so in a fit of anger, or because he was a cynic philosopher exhibiting his contempt for material things.

—George [Rosen, *Madness in Society* (1968)](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-485)

Every society, regardless of time or place, regards some of its members as mad. Typically, this label has been reserved for a small number of seemingly senseless behaviors. For example, the Native Alaskan term for crazy, “nuthkavihak,” refers to “such phenomena as talking to oneself, screaming at someone who does not exist, believing that a child or husband was murdered by witchcraft when nobody else believes it, believing oneself to be an animal . . . killing dogs, and threatening people.”[1](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-1) Similarly, the Kalumburu people in Australia use the word “wambaba” to mean mad or crazy; it refers to “an excited or assaultive individual who talks strangely, swears a lot, forgets his manners, opens his bowels where people live, knocks over his water holder, or runs off in fright to the bush. He behaves in a highly disturbed and incomprehensible way.”[2](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-2) Early 20th-century German psychiatrist Karl Jaspers comparably isolated “incomprehensibility” as the most distinctive aspect of madness: “All the sudden impulses, the unfathomable affect and lack of affect, the sudden pauses in conversation, the disconnected ideas. . . . Some call these actions eccentric, silly. But with all these terms we are at the end of the day saying the same thing: The common factor is ‘incomprehensible.’ ”[3](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-3) The inexplicable aspects of madness contrast with the socially shared conceptions of reality that mark sanity.

Present views of what constitutes a mental illness encompass such unfathomable conditions but far more as well. Despite general agreement regarding the pole of madness, huge disparities exist on where dividing lines should be placed between it and sanity and even if there is any clear demarcation at all. The range of current mental disorders includes, among much else, depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), various addictions, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and numerous personality disorders. The most highly regarded surveys indicate that a quarter of the U.S. population experiences some mental illness in any particular year and well over half at some point in their lives.[4](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-4) Other, more comprehensive, studies show that two-thirds of people will become mentally ill over their lifetime.[5](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-5) Recent cohorts of young people report especially vast amounts of disorder: in the early 21st century, half of American adolescents seemingly have some mental illness by age eighteen.[6](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-6) Global data from the World Health Organization indicate that mental illnesses now account for more years of disability than any other disease category.[7](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-7)

Enormous historical and cultural disparities also exist regarding what sort of authority should respond to mental illnesses. Dominant current practices—following a long tradition—regard these conditions as brain-based defects that medical and other mental health professionals should treat. In other times and places, however, similar behaviors have been viewed as sins that require confession, possessed states in need of exorcism, crimes that entail punishment, or creative inspirations that should be cultivated.[8](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-8)

While various groups provide an extensive array of answers to questions about the nature of mental illness and its boundaries with sanity, all have confronted the same issues. What distinguishes mental illnesses from other sorts of devalued conditions and from normality? Should medical, religious, psychological, legal, or no authority at all respond to the mentally ill? Which factors lead people to become mad? What treatments might help them recover? The various responses that societies have provided to these puzzles are both widely divergent and surprisingly similar to current understandings.

### Distinguishing Sanity from Madness

All groups face the challenge of defining what aspects of madness distinguish it from normal actions on the one hand and other sorts of deviant behaviors on the other. A debate among Talmudic scholars two millennia ago illustrates the difficulties that arise in isolating the distinctive qualities of insanity:

It was proposed that a person who wandered about alone at night, who spent the night in a cemetery, or who tore his garments and destroyed what was given to him might be considered deranged—if such behavior appeared irrational. However, it was pointed out that otherwise normal persons could also behave in this way, e.g. one who spent the night in a cemetery might have done so to practice magic, or that another who tore his clothes might have done so in a fit of anger, or because he was a cynic philosopher exhibiting his contempt for material things.[9](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-9)

For these ancient observers, the characteristic feature of mentally ill people did not lie in their behavior. Instead, it involved the absence of contextually appropriate reasons for their actions. The mad often wandered at night, slept in cemeteries, or tore their clothes off. Yet, sorcerers, angry people, or philosophers also did the same things. The essential difference was that the latter had socially comprehensible motivations—practicing magic, fits of anger, philosophical principles—for their behaviors. In contrast, observers could not connect the activities of the mentally ill to any socially explicable purpose. Inferences about sanity and madness, therefore, involved whether or not actions could be linked to understandable motives.

Two thousand years later, acclaimed sociologist Erving Goffman made a similar point: “The delusions of a private can be the rights of a general; the obscene invitations of a man to a strange girl can be the spicy endearments of a husband to his wife; the wariness of a paranoid is the warranted practice of thousands of undercover agents.”[10](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-10) Judgments about whether some behavior is deluded or justified, obscene or romantic, and paranoid or reasonable require knowledge of relevant contextual information. When observers can find a socially plausible reason for some action, they do not define it as a sign of mental disturbance.

The Sebei people of East Africa provide an example of how groups differentiate mental illness from other devalued behaviors such as criminality, drug use, intellectual deficiency, bad manners, or ignorance. Anthropologist Robert Edgerton recounts a dialogue among a group of Sebei who are discussing the behavior of a young man that they observed talking nonsense, making abrupt and jerky movements, flapping his arms like a bird, and giggling like a child:

salimu: He is a strange boy.

sayekwa: He is a foolish boy. Why does he behave that way?

salimu: He may be mad or he may be foolish (mentally retarded).

sayekwa: It could also be bewitchment or a fever or something like a fit. . . .

interpreter: There is something wrong. People here smoke bhang. Perhaps he may be a bhang man.

sayekwa: No. I don’t think that. He is more like he is crazy.

salimu: I think he may be a fool.

interpreter: It is impossible to know without knowing about his family. We could ask one of these people about him.

anthropologist: What is the difference between a fool and a madman?

salimu: A fool was born without sense. A madman becomes senseless because of a disease or witchcraft. We would have to know his history to tell about this young man.[11](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-11)

This debate shows the typical constructions involved in making attributions of insanity. Observers use factors such as family history, biographical circumstances, and situational contingencies to decide among the various possible interpretations of inappropriate behaviors. Before participants use mental illness to explain some strange behavior, they rule out other designations such as foolishness, bewitchment, psychotropic drug use, or epilepsy. The answers to the questions that the Sebei pose also imply the kind of response that should be made to the strange behavior. If he is a “bhang man,” then the village equivalent to the police might be called. If he is a fool, he was born that way and no remedies are available. If, however, the boy is deemed to be mad, they might summon a witchdoctor to expel the possessing force. Similar distinctions persist in current psychiatric diagnostic manuals.

### The DSM Definition of Mental Disorder

Discussions of the nature of mental illness mark all societies, including our own. Consider the “official” designation of mental disorder that is found in the [American Psychiatric Association’s *Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders*](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-7) (fifth edition; DSM-5):

A mental disorder is a syndrome characterized by clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotion regulation, or behavior that reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental processes underlying mental functioning. Mental disorders are usually associated with significant distress or disability in social, occupational, or other important activities. An expectable or culturally approved response to a common stressor or loss, such as the death of a loved one, is not a mental disorder. Socially deviant behavior (e.g. political, religious, or sexual) and conflicts that are primarily between the individual and society are not mental disorders unless the deviance or conflict results from a dysfunction in the individual, as described above.[12](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-12)

Much like the Sebei, the DSM strives to isolate the particular qualities that distinguish mental disorders from other kinds of devalued conditions and from normality. Its characterization has four central aspects, two that try to express what mental illnesses are and two that attempt to delineate them from non-disordered behaviors.

At the heart of the way that the DSM identifies a mental disorder—comparable to the various definitions of premodern groups—is the presence of a “dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or developmental processes underlying mental functioning.” Although the definition does not specify what a “dysfunction” is, the term presumably indicates that some process is not simply undesirable or rare but that something has *gone wrong* with mechanisms involving cognition, emotional arousal, perception, memory, and the like.[13](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-13) The resulting symptoms are neither explicable responses to circumstances nor culturally normative. The definition does not stipulate whether dysfunctions involve defective brain or psychic processes but allows for either sort of account. Nor does it mention what qualities mark the *appropriate* functioning of psychological, biological, or developmental processes.

The DSM’s placement of dysfunction at the heart of its definition of mental disorder echoes a long historical tradition. For example, a renowned Ancient Greek physician, Aretaeus of Cappadocia (~2nd century ad), described melancholics in these terms: “Sufferers are dull or stern: dejected or unreasonably torpid, without any manifest cause.”[14](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-14) Here, “without any manifest cause” implies that melancholic symptoms result from some inner dysfunction as opposed to reasonable grounds for melancholy such as the loss of an intimate relationship, economic catastrophe, or diagnosis of a serious physical disease. Two thousand years later, one of the founders of 19th-century biological psychiatry, German psychiatrist Wilhelm Griesinger (1817–1868), made a comparable distinction between identical symptoms that result from a dysfunction or from some appropriate external cause:

The melancholia which precedes insanity sometimes appears externally as the direct continuation of some painful emotion dependent upon some objective cause . . . , e.g. grief, jealousy; and it is distinguished from the mental pain experienced by healthy persons by its excessive degree, by its more than ordinary protraction, by its becoming more and more independent of external influences, and by the other accessory affections which accompany it.[15](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-15)

Symptoms that are rooted in external situations are “healthy”; those with disproportionate severity or duration to their generating contexts indicate insanity. The DSM follows this enduring line of thought, emphasizing how only symptoms that reflect an internal dysfunction rather than some appropriate situational cause mark some disorder. If nothing is wrong with someone’s inner functioning, they do not have a mental illness.

As the debate among Talmudic scholars shows, it is often difficult to distinguish conditions that arise from a dysfunction or from some other reason. Consider the case of Michael Phelps, who has won more Olympic medals than any athlete in history. When he was nine years old, Phelps received a diagnosis of ADHD, which is made when someone is unable to focus, sit still, or concentrate, presumably because of some inner dysfunction. “I was told by one of his teachers that he couldn’t focus on anything,” his mother recounts.[16](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-16) This suggests that Phelps had some—possibly biological—inability to pay attention. Yet, he had no comparable problems of focus when it came to his swimming. “For the past 10 years, at least, he’s never missed a practice,” Phelps’s mother recalled. “Even on Christmas, the pool is the first place we go, and he’s happy to be there.” Did Phelps have a dysfunction or, instead, a compelling competing interest that preoccupied him?[17](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-17) Alternatively, he could have been one of the youngest children in his class so that his relative immaturity put him at greater risk for receiving an ADHD diagnoses.[18](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-18) All groups have faced the intrinsic uncertainties in distinguishing behaviors that stem from dysfunctions or from other reasons.

Pederasty—sexual relations involving adult men and prepubescent boys—provides another example of the problems involved in making decisions about the presence of some dysfunction. Our culture views pederasty as perhaps the most reviled form of sexual behavior. The DSM-5 defines adults who are aroused by having sex with children (generally thirteen years or younger) as having a pedophilic disorder, which involves inappropriate targets of sexual preferences.[19](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-19) In our society, some inner dysfunction is likely to motivate pedophiliacs’ anomalous sexual preference because their desires persist despite strong social sanctions.[20](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-20)

Yet, many cultures have institutionalized sexual relationships between older men and prepubescent and adolescent boys. Most notably, the ancient Greeks esteemed intergenerational erotic ties among males, which were deeply embedded in their civic life: “A whole philosophy was built up round [pederasty], based on the idea that the lover was the educator and military trainer and partner of the beloved, and would do everything to earn his admiration,” historian Michael Grant notes.[21](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-21) Involvement in culturally approved man–boy sex among the ancient Greeks (and other societies that do not condemn such relationships) would rarely stem from defective sexual arousal mechanisms but instead are learned and culturally approved practices. The Siwan group in North Africa provides an example: “All men and boys engage in anal intercourse. Males are singled out as peculiar if they did not do so.”[22](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-22) In such groups, a dysfunction is unlikely to underlie pederasty. Therefore, similar modes of sexual attraction are likely to stem from dysfunctions in groups where they arise in the face of harsh disapproval but not in others where they are customary and, sometimes, even mandated.

The example of pederasty illustrates some of the many issues raised by the requirement that a mental disorder must stem from some dysfunction: is it possible to know what the appropriate functions of psychological mechanisms are without reference to cultural values; can a mechanism that is dysfunctional in some groups be functional in others; do many negatively valued behaviors such as extreme jealousy, hatred of outgroups, fear of strangers, or intercourse with pubescent adolescents stem from natural, rather than dysfunctional, processes?[23](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-23) Such concerns raise the question of the objective or value-laden nature of dysfunctions. “The most fundamental issue, and also the most contentious one,” psychiatrist Robert Kendell contends, “is whether disease and illness are normative concepts based on value judgments, or whether they are value-free scientific terms; in other words, whether they are biomedical terms or socio-political ones.”[24](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-24) The DSM introduces a normative component into its definition through invoking the distress or disability associated with some dysfunction.

The DSM implicitly deals with the issue of whether definitions of mental disorder are objective or value-laden through stating that a dysfunction in itself typically does not provide sufficient grounds to infer the presence of a mental disorder. Only dysfunctions that are “usually associated with distress or disability” are disorders.[25](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-25) Therefore, adequate characterizations of mental disorder contain elements of *both* a dysfunction that involves incapacity to perform a natural function *and* a cultural judgment that defines the dysfunction as undesirable. Jerome Wakefield’s term “harmful dysfunction” captures this dual quality of mental disorder.[26](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-26)

The necessity of harm means that dysfunctions are not mental disorders when they are neither distressing nor disabling. Many psychological dysfunctions—for example, persistent depressions, crippling compulsions, or inexplicable anxiety—intrinsically entail distress. Yet, many others do not involve any misery at all. For example, anosognosia—the unwillingness of people to believe that anything is wrong with their minds—can characterize people with schizophrenia.[27](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-27) Or, the manic stage of bipolar disorder is marked by euphoria, seemingly exceptional ideas, highly pleasurable behaviors, and often unusual degrees of creativity.[28](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-28) The DSM takes this into account by saying that dysfunctions that do not involve distress must entail “disability in social, occupational, or other important activities” if they are to be considered as disorders. In contrast to distress, which refers to the feelings of the disturbed individual, disability often involves problems with other people such as parents, spouses, teachers, bosses, or social control agents.

The DSM’s distress or disability constraint means that, although all mental disorders result from some inner dysfunction, all dysfunctions are not disorders. Only dysfunctions that also have impairing consequences for selves or others are mental disorders, presumably because it would be pointless to be concerned with conditions that are unproblematic for both individuals and those around them. One important consequence of this aspect of the DSM definition is that, while dysfunctions can be grounded in universal organic or psychic processes, mental disorders can be cross-culturally relative. Because the degree of distress or disability that any dysfunction entails varies considerably across cultures, the definition implies that dysfunctions can be disorders in some cultures but not in others.

Anthropologist Ruth [Benedict’s “Anthropology and the Abnormal” (1934)](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-37) presented the classic statement that the concept of mental disorder is culturally relative. Benedict (1887–1948) questioned the validity of applying Western definitions of normality and abnormality to different cultures. Instead, she asserted that various groups around the world consider as normal and appropriate the sorts of behaviors—paranoia, seizures, trances, and the like—that Western psychiatry defined as abnormal. She used as an example the Dobuans of Melanesia, who display a constant fear of poisoning that they saw as normal rather than as paranoiac. Or, she noted that the Shasta Indians in California and the native people of Siberia did not view seizures as dreaded illnesses but instead as signs of special connections to supernatural powers that singled out people for authority and leadership. She also discussed catalepsy—a state that involved trancelike states, hearing voices, losses of voluntary motion, and rigid limbs—to illustrate how some other cultures treated as valued conditions what Western psychiatry considered as the mental disorder of catatonic schizophrenia. “There are,” Benedict asserted, “well-described cultures in which these abnormals function at ease and with honor, and apparently without danger or difficulty to the society.”[29](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-29)

Conversely, Benedict described behaviors that were normalized and even rewarded in our culture that would be considered mad in other cultures. Dobuans, for example, would regard a person who was always cheerful, happy, and outgoing as crazy. Divisions between justified suspicions or paranoia, ritualistic invocations of spirits or hallucinations, and unnaturally prolonged or appropriate periods of grief were often blurry, tied to context, and subject to value judgments. Normality thus resided in culturally approved conventions, not in universal biological or psychological standards of appropriate functioning. “All our local conventions of moral behavior and of immoral are without absolute validity,” Benedict concluded.[30](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-30)

Advocates of the DSM definition could use the distress or disability requirement to challenge Benedict’s assertion that there is no validity to Western conceptions of schizophrenia because some groups place people who hallucinate, have delusions, fall into trance states, and speak incoherently into valued and honored social roles. From their perspective, such individuals have dysfunctions that their cultures do not evaluate as harmful.[31](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-31) The distress or disability requirement implies that the universal aspects of dysfunctions are compatible with the culturally relative nature of mental disorders.

Like decisions about the presence of a dysfunction, judgments about distress or disability can be difficult to make. Take the example of the poet Emily Dickinson who, by the time she was forty, would not leave her home and hid in her room, unwilling to see even her longtime friends.[32](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-32) Nothing about Dickinson’s circumstances could account for her refusal to walk outside or to meet with people she had known for extended periods of time. Her extreme social isolation seems likely to have stemmed from some inner dysfunction. Yet, it was arguably neither distressing nor disabling. Indeed, many people regard her as the greatest American poet, largely because of the poems she wrote during her period of seclusion. Whether her extreme fear of going out in public or seeing friends should count as disabling or, on the contrary, a precondition for her genius has no easy answer.

The distress or disability stipulation is a complicating factor in setting boundaries between sanity and madness. It also raises challenging issues related to the value-laden component of definitions of mental disorder. Both feelings of distress and social impairments often arise because of negative societal attitudes rather than any intrinsic qualities of some dysfunction. For example, the DSM-III diagnosis of “ego-dystonic homosexuality,” which applied to homosexuals who were distressed by their sexual orientation, seems to result more from individual responses to oppressive social norms than from a dysfunction.[33](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-33) It shows how the harm that some condition engenders can stem from cultural values rather than from the dysfunction. Separating the normative from the biomedical elements of mental disorder is often an imposing task.

Like ancient Talmudic scholars, the DSM tries to specify what sorts of phenomena do *not* constitute internal dysfunctions and so are not mental disorders. The DSM’s definition distinguishes dysfunctions from “an expectable or culturally approved response to a common stressor or loss, such as the death of a loved one.” This means that symptoms resembling dysfunctions and entailing intense suffering or disability are nevertheless not disordered because they are natural responses to circumstances.[34](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-34) The definition uses “the death of a loved one” as a model for highly distressing states that are not disordered because they are contextually explicable. People naturally become intensely sad after someone close to them dies; their internal functioning is appropriate, not pathological. Although such symptoms can be very distressing and, often, disabling, they are reasonably commensurate to the severity of the situation that led to them and, unlike dysfunctions, typically dissipate with the passage of time. In contrast, as Griesinger noted, mental disorders arise in the absence of a suitable context or initially appear after some precipitating event but become disengaged from their initial trigger, take on a life of their own, and are immune to changes in external conditions.

The intense grief that psychiatrist and anthropologist Arthur Kleinman suffered after the death of his wife illustrates this aspect of non-disordered yet highly distressing conditions.

In March, 2011, my wife died and I experienced the physiology of grief. I felt greatly sad and yearned for her. I didn’t sleep well. When I returned to a now empty house, I became agitated. I also felt fatigued and had difficulty concentrating on my academic work. My weight declined owing to a newly indifferent appetite.[35](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-35)

Kleinman’s symptoms easily meet the DSM criteria for major depressive disorder. Yet, as long as emotions have been recorded, experiences of grief—feelings of deep sadness that follow the death of an intimate—have been central to portrayals of basic human nature. Kleinman’s grief, as the DSM definition recognizes, is a normal response to an intense loss. Accordingly, his distress gradually eased over time in the absence of any treatment: “This dark experience lightened over the months, so that the feelings became much less acute by around 6 months.”[36](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-36) The intense depressive symptoms that Kleinman and other grievers experience are not products of a dysfunction but are explicable in light of their circumstances of loss.

Like Kleinman’s grief, anxious emotions that could indicate a dysfunction when no danger is present are appropriate in perilous situations. Psychiatrist Kenneth Kendler uses the example of a mountain climber who suffers a full-blown panic attack when he loses his grip and falls before his rope catches him. “A panic attack,” Kendler explains, “is not—in and of itself—psychopathological. It only becomes pathology when it occurs in certain contexts—at times and in places when it should not. Thus the diagnostic status of panic disorder is inherently contextual. It is not a disorder in and of itself but only in certain contexts.”[37](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-37)

As is the case with grief, not panic symptoms alone but their relationship to the circumstances in which they emerge accounts for the distinction between “expectable” panic attacks that are not disorders and “unexpectable” ones that are disorders. Identical symptoms that are explicable in one context, such as falling down a mountain, are signs of a mental disorder when there is no contextually appropriate explanation for them. “Most negative mental states such as sadness, despair, anxiety, fear, agitation, and anger,” Wakefield and psychiatrist Michael First observe, “are not abnormalities but normal responses to life’s vicissitudes.”[38](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-38)

PTSD illustrates some of the nuances involved in distinguishing “abnormalities” from “normal responses to life’s vicissitudes.” It definitionally arises from exposure to some traumatic event and so might seem to be an “expectable” response to a stressor and, therefore, not a dysfunction. However, the characteristics that Griesinger noted in regard to depression—“excessive degree,” “more than ordinary protraction,” and “becoming more and more independent of external influences”—suggest that continuing symptoms of PTSD have become detached from their initial generating context. Their intrusive, recurrent, and involuntary nature indicates that an extreme environmental stressor has led the natural functioning of memory mechanisms to breakdown.[39](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-39) Because such symptoms are also almost invariably associated with distress and/or disability, PTSD would be a genuine mental disorder and not simply a contextually explicable response to circumstances. Needless to say, it is often difficult to distinguish behaviors that are “dysfunctional” from those that are “expectable” reactions to given contexts.

The DSM definition strives to separate mental disorders not just from contextually explicable behaviors but also from “socially deviant behaviors” and “conflicts between individuals and society.” Often, drinking heavily, persistently using culturally devalued drugs, engaging in unusual sexual activities, or offending the wrong kind of person are types of deviant social behaviors: violations of social norms that define standards of proper behavior. Likewise, people who disregard social conventions, hold divergent political beliefs, or have disreputable lifestyles might develop conflicts with society. The DSM definition distinguishes such nonconformists from those who have dysfunctions that lead them to suffer negative effects such as persistent abuse of addictive substances, compulsive pursuit of activities that harm them, or an inability to refrain from engaging in socially disvalued activities. The latter would have mental disorders only when some internal dysfunction leads to their distressing or disabling conditions.

This aspect of the definition again contains echoes of the Sebei, who divide madness from deviant behavior: “Respondent after respondent qualifies his description of a psychotic behavior by saying ‘without reason.’ That is, murder as such is not psychotic—only murder *without some good reason is psychotic*. The same thing is true of every other behavior cited.”[40](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-40) The DSM strives to separate rule-violating behaviors that entail individual responsibility from those that stem from a dysfunction and therefore should be treated rather than punished.

Such decisions are often controversial. Consider the case of Adam Lanza, who killed his mother, twenty elementary school children, six staff members, and then himself in Newtown, Connecticut, in 2012. Like Emily Dickinson, his life was marked by extreme social isolation: “Lanza seemed to have no friends or people he could turn to for support or assistance and did not appear to have any enjoyment of life.”[41](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-41) Unlike Dickinson, Lanza was obsessed with previous mass shootings and spree killings. Many people would agree with Lanza’s father, who stated “You can’t get any more evil.”[42](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-42) For him, Lanza’s actions were not the senseless acts of a madman but those of a depraved killer. Current clinicians would be hard pressed to make more informed decisions than the Sebei about whether Lanza was a mass murderer or a victim of some inner dysfunction.

Hoarding disorder, which was added to the DSM in 2013, shows the often value-laden nature of decisions that try to distinguish mental disorders from conflicts between individuals and society. The essence of this condition is “persistent difficulties discarding or parting with possessions regardless of their actual value.”[43](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-43) Hoarders typically accumulate so many items that they and others have difficulty navigating their living spaces. Individuals themselves are typically not troubled by their condition unless someone tries to *stop* their hoarding. Interventions typically arise after complaints from family members, neighbors, or public health departments. The justification for calling their behaviors “dysfunctions” or “mental disorders” as opposed to “conflicts between individuals and society” is unclear.

Precise lines rarely exist between dysfunctional and deviant conditions. “No other specialty of medicine deals with diseases whose initial signs can be so easily confused with moral lapse,” an officer at the Rockefeller Foundation wrote in 1944.[44](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-44) Indeed, many particular DSM diagnoses seem to encompass activities that were traditionally regarded as sins. Examples include distinctions between binge eating disorder and gluttony, hypersexual disorder and lust, intermittent explosive disorder and wrath, or narcissistic personality disorder and pride.[45](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-45) To say the least, the grounds for separating dysfunctions and, therefore, mental disorders from such traditional vices are rarely precise. Other diagnoses, such as oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder are extraordinarily difficult to separate from “conflicts between individuals and society” as well as from delinquency and criminality.[46](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-46) Moreover, such definitions diverge widely across cultures. American psychiatrists might diagnose an unmarried woman (but not a single man) who engages in unrestrained sex as hypomanic; the same behavior might elicit harsh punishment in many Muslim societies and indifference in Scandinavian ones.[47](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-47) Nevertheless, all groups strive to distinguish people who are mad from those who are normal, deviant, sinful, criminal, or prophetic, however difficult this splitting might be in practice.

The poles of madness and sanity are usually obvious; a remarkable consensus exists across various cultures regarding what are clear cases of mental illness.[48](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-48) Talmudic scholars, Sebei observers, Australian Native People, 19th-century psychiatrists, and the promulgators of the DSM would concur that certain kinds of unreasonable, inexplicable, and incomprehensible actions constitute one extreme of distinctly disordered behaviors. They would also agree that actions that are understandable responses to particular contexts represent the opposite pole of normality.[49](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-49) Yet, all of these definitions—including the DSM’s—recognize that the boundaries between the extremes of mental health and mental illness are typically vague and fuzzy. The concept of mental disorder, therefore, is often indefinite because the phenomena that it applies to are themselves indefinite.[50](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-50)

Answers to the central questions involved in defining mental disorder—what is a dysfunction; to what extent are the negative consequences of mental disorders direct results of dysfunctions or of social attitudes; what standards distinguish contextually explicable from dysfunctional symptoms; and how is it possible to separate mental disorders from other forms of social deviance?—seem no more definitive now than they were thousands of years ago. Perhaps the reason for this lack of progress does not lie as much in the flaws of the DSM definition as in the intrinsically elusive and possibly insolvable nature of the question of what a mental disorder is. While the extremes of madness and sanity are usually clear, different societies have placed boundaries for the vast terrain of conditions that fall in between these poles in very diverse places.

### To What Extent Do Mental Illnesses Resemble Physical Ones?

One perennial issue groups have faced has been how to specify the distinctive qualities of mental disorders. A second recurrent concern regards what kind of authority defines their nature and controls their treatment. A particularly contentious issue has been the extent to which mental illnesses involve somatic or psychic processes. The answer to this question typically dictates whether mental disorders fall within medical or, alternatively, religious, legal, philosophical, psychological, or some other jurisdiction.

The view that some organic defect lies behind madness has persisted for millennia.[51](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-51) This belief implies that mental illnesses are comparable to bodily diseases: both are biologically grounded, subject to the laws of nature, and have qualities that are independent of individual or cultural characteristics. Hippocratic physicians in 4th-century bce Greece provided perhaps the first statement of this perspective: “Men ought to know that from the brain, and from the brain only, arise our pleasures, joys, laughter, and jests, as well as our sorrows, pains, griefs and tears.”[52](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-52) The idea that mental disorders are brain diseases also dominates contemporary portrayals of mental illness. A 1999 report from the U.S. Surgeon General echoes the Hippocratics: “It is, in fact, a core tenet of modern science that behavior and our subjective mental lives reflect the overall workings of the brain. Thus, symptoms related to behavior or mental lives clearly reflect variations or abnormalities in brain function.”[53](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-53) The DSM, too, implies that the ultimate benchmark for health and disorder is the same in psychiatry as it is in physical medicine, namely, whether the individual’s mental processes are performing the functions they are naturally designed to perform.

In the biomedical view mental disorders, like organic diseases, have properties that cannot be reduced to individual idiosyncrasies or cultural values. “This modern history of diagnosis,” according to historian Charles Rosenberg, “is inextricably related to disease specificity, to the notion that diseases can and should be thought of as entities existing outside the unique manifestations of illness in particular men and women: during the past century especially, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment have been linked ever more tightly to specific, agreed-upon disease categories.”[54](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-54) The symptoms of, say, depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, or bipolar disorder, no less than those of cancer, diabetes, asthma, or malaria, can be abstracted from the individuals who have them and studied as objects with distinct causes, courses, and outcomes. Nosologies such as the DSM thus do not classify individuals: “A common misconception is that a classification of mental disorders classifies people, when actually what are being classified are disorders that individuals have,” the manual asserts.[55](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-55)

Because in the biomedical view mental as well as organic diseases reflect physical laws, they operate independently of time, space, and social evaluations. For example, in 1882 famed neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot (1825–1893) proclaimed of hysteria that “everything unfolds according to the rules, which are always the same. . . . They are valid for all countries, for all epochs, for all races, and are, in short, universal.”[56](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-56) Similarly, Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926), the foremost psychiatric diagnostician in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, visited Singapore to see if Asian patients differed from European ones. He concluded that they had the same disease: “we must therefore seek the real cause of dementia praecox [schizophrenia] in conditions which are spread all over the world, which thus do not lie either in race or in climate, in food, or in any other general circumstances of life.”[57](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-57) Although local factors typically lead to divergent prevalence in different settings, the core features of each mental disorder are invariant results of natural processes.

Medicine is only one, although often the most prominent, form of jurisdiction over madness. Benedict, for example, showed how many premodern groups place individuals who enter possessed states that were similar to madness into valued social roles that entail exceptional spiritual connections to supernatural powers. For a millennium in the West, religious authorities dictated responses to the insane, which typically strove to eliminate the evil influences that polluted them. Legal definitions, too, which place rule-violating behaviors within frameworks of responsibility and guilt, often compete with medical authority.

Other views contend that madness should not be subject to any form of social control. Perhaps the best-known statement of this position is psychiatrist Thomas Szasz’s assertion that the concept of mental illness itself is a “myth.”[58](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-58) Szasz (1920–2012) claimed that terms such as “illness” and “disease” only apply to physical lesions. In contrast, mental illnesses deviate from psychosocial norms that have no objective reality in the natural world and so reflect culturally grounded value judgments. Hence, the notion of a “mental illness” is an inherent contradiction. Unless they have violated some legal standard, there is no justification for exerting any form of involuntary social control over people who are thought to be “mentally ill.” A variety of competing philosophical, religious, legal, and other perspectives continues to challenge the primacy of medical authority over mental illness.

### What Factors Lead People to Become Mentally Ill?

A third continuing issue regards the perceived reasons for why some people become mad. Observers have sometimes found the causes of mental illness in inner biological or psychological forces and, at other times, in environmental, social, and cultural factors. Often, the two types of explanations have been thoroughly intertwined.

One type of internal characterization emphasizes how some organic defect in the brain, nerves, or other bodily systems including hormones, the digestive system, or the heart accounts for madness. Depending on the particular time period, physiological foundations have included the humors, constricted blood vessels, weak nerves, or deficient or excessive levels of neurochemicals among many others. For example, 18th-century physician Nicholas Robinson (*c*. 1697–1775) declared that all mental disorders “from the slightest Symptoms of the Spleen and Vapours, to the most confirm’d Affections of Melancholy Madness and Lunacy . . . are no imaginary Whims or Fancies, but real Affections of Matter and Motion, whenever the Constitution of the Brain warps from its natural Standard.”[59](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-59) Current philosopher Paul Churchland echoes this view: “The victims of mental illness are the victims primarily of sheer chemical circumstances, whose origins are more metabolic and biological, than they are social or psychological.”[60](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-60) Such biological explanations typically entail medications or other manipulations of the brain as treatments of choice. One of the few constants across history has been the use of drugs, particularly opium and alcohol, to alleviate distress among people with mental disorders.

While many inner interpretations ground mental disturbances in defective brain processes, many others use psychological understandings. The Freudian emphasis on repressed memories of childhood sexuality as causes of a variety of neuroses among adults is one prominent example of a psychic explanation.[61](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-61) Another is when cognitive distortions in information processing about the self, the world, and the future lead to persistent negatively biased thoughts and appraisals and consequent depression and anxiety. Current cognitive methods strive to change distorted patterns of thinking that are presumably responsible for the presence of mental illnesses.[62](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-62) They are descendants of ancient philosophies such as Stoicism and Epicureanism, which have taught people to use psychological techniques that distance themselves from worldly concerns as ways to establish inner peace of mind.

Throughout history, explanations of mental disorders that rely on external stimuli stand alongside those emphasizing internal factors. Such influences have included supernatural interventions, witchcraft, climate, traumatic events, or problematic interpersonal relationships to explain the emergence of mental illnesses. Many treatments of mental illness as well have manipulated environments, often aiming to promote restrained modes of living through changing diets, sleep patterns, and exercise routines. For example, the mental institutions that developed in the early 19th century in Europe and the United States were based on treatments that assumed changing surroundings would alleviate or cure madness.

Internal and external explanations often have not been regarded as mutually exclusive. Hippocratic conceptions of mental illness, for example, focused on imbalances among bodily humors. Yet, they also emphasized how environmental disturbances led to excesses or deficiencies of these physical fluids. Similarly, since the 17th century observers have associated the pressures of civilization, stressful lifestyles, domestic woes, and unhealthy living conditions with mental illness while simultaneously indicating that biologically and psychologically vulnerable people are the most likely ones to succumb to these burdens. Likewise, although 19th-century psychiatrists commonly viewed heredity as the chief source of insanity, they also invoked triggering causes such as financial ruin, family troubles, or masturbation to explain who among predisposed people actually developed some mental illness.[63](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-63)

Many current neuroscientists as well are beginning to focus on gene–environment relationships rather than on isolated brain or genetic processes.[64](07_chapter1.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-1-note-64) Such interactive conceptions do not view internal and external forces as competing explanations but seek to understand the ways in which various kinds of social environments provoke or suppress biological predispositions. Such explanations emphasize how the causes of mental disorder resist reduction to any single factor, whether within or outside of individuals. Accounts and treatments featuring internal or external dynamics or their combinations have waxed and waned throughout history.

A number of the questions that engage the modern mental health professions—what constitutes a mental disorder; are mental disorders continuous with or discrete from normal behaviors; do holistic cultural and personality factors or specific diseases underlie mental symptoms; and how do biological and psychological liabilities interact with external stressors?—would be familiar to practitioners across the ages. Although the technologies available to mental health specialists at present vastly exceed those available in prior periods, it is an open question whether extant definitions of, explanations for, and responses to mental disorders surpass those of preceding eras.

### Plan of the Book

The chapters that follow examine the answers that have arisen in various historical periods about the nature of mental illness, the degree to which it resembles or is distinct from bodily diseases, what type of experts have the legitimate authority to treat it, and which factors cause and might cure it. The following chapter considers how these questions were formulated and answered in the West before the psychiatric profession was established in the 19th century. It begins by describing three distinct views that developed among the ancient Greeks: the Homeric, Platonic, and Hippocratic conceptions that developed external, mental, and organic views of madness, respectively. During the long period between the fall of Rome and the 17th century, faith-based outlooks supplanted organic views and medicine became subordinate to the church. The subsequent European Enlightenment resulted in two distinct biological and psychological conceptions of mental disorders. At the same time, definitions of mental illness expanded to encompass nervous conditions that had little resemblance to traditional stereotypes of madness.

[Chapter 3](09_chapter3.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-3) considers the model of mental disorder that arose in the 19th century alongside the creation of a new profession dedicated to the treatment of mental illness. This period marked the advent of psychiatrists as the socially legitimate arbiters of what constituted sanity and madness. Their conceptions embraced biomedical tenets that grounded mental disorders in defective brains, viewed mental illnesses as comparable to physical illnesses, and focused on inner, organic causes. Nevertheless, most believed that madness usually arose in conjunction with some socially based triggering event. A new type of response to the insane—inpatient mental asylums—also became widespread during this era.

The fourth chapter discusses Sigmund Freud’s revolutionary model of mental illness that he developed at the beginning of the 20th century. Upending previous conceptions, Freud’s psychodynamic approach emphasized the similarities of normal and neurotic behaviors, the differences between mental and physical symptoms, and the conflict between inner instincts and social forces of repression as the major generator of both healthy and pathological expressions. The dynamic model, which became especially influential in the United States, expanded the realm of psychiatry to outpatient practices, the control of deviance, and understandings of everyday life. It was far less influential in affecting the treatment of psychotic forms of madness, which it generally ignored.

While the previous three chapters primarily concern European developments, the remaining chapters focus on the United States. [Chapter 5](11_chapter5.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-5) examines how American dynamic psychiatry evolved into a more environmental approach after World War II. In collaboration with the military and the National Institute of Mental Health, a new socially oriented psychiatry applied therapeutic frameworks to a wide array of distressing conditions and strove to prevent, as well as treat, mental disorders. Its psychosocial model embraced expansive definitions of what constituted mental illness, separated mental from physical conditions, and focused on external rather than interior causes of psychic disturbances. During this era, psychiatric influence gained unprecedented scope and reach.

The next chapter examines the crisis that arose in American psychiatry during the 1960s and deepened in the 1970s. An anti-psychiatry movement developed that denied the very existence of mental disorders. An influential counterculture emerged that regarded psychiatry as upholding outmoded and oppressive social norms. At the same time, non-medical mental health professionals challenged psychiatry’s dominion over psychotherapy. Third party insurers that paid for mental health treatment came to question the efficacy of dynamic therapies. Psychiatry’s sponsors in the federal government also became skeptical of expansive programs of prevention and social change. The field’s very existence came into peril in this period.

[Chapter 7](13_chapter7.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-7) describes how the appearance of the DSM-III in 1980 resolved psychiatry’s crisis of legitimacy. This new diagnostic system used a biomedical model that equated mental with physical disorders to reclassify all of the numerous conditions that had concerned dynamic psychiatrists. But, in contrast to the psychodynamic model, diagnostic psychiatry sharply split mental disorders from normal behaviors. At the same time, it was agnostic about the causes of mental illnesses. The manual’s great accomplishment was to provide the specific diseases that psychiatry required for it to seem to be a genuine medical specialty. The DSM-III allowed psychiatry to reinvent itself as a scientifically grounded discipline, a portrayal that persists to the present.

The following chapter surveys the rise of neuroscientific studies of mental illness that have dominated research since the 1980s. Much like its 19th-century predecessors, this model regards understanding the brain as the key to unlock the mysteries of mental illnesses. It combines the DSM’s classifications with a militantly biological approach to explaining various conditions. Neuroscientific findings, however, thoroughly conflict with the DSM model: they indicate that mental illnesses reflect overlapping general vulnerabilities more than isolatable, specific disorders, gradations rather than discrete entities, and a complicated array of inner and external causes that interact with brain-based mechanisms.

The penultimate chapter examines the paradox of the enormous institutional, social, and cultural successes of the DSM revolution with its inability to validly capture the nature of mental disorder. It focuses on three consequences of the DSM nosology. First, epidemiological studies produce vast, but useful, overestimates of the amount of mental disorder in the general population. Second, the DSM system has produced a divide between clinicians who find the extant system of great practical value and researchers who see it as hindering progress in understanding the nature of mental disorders and in developing targeted treatments for them. This led psychiatric researchers to attempt to replace the DSM’s categorical taxonomy with a dimensional system in [the DSM-5, published in 2013](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-589). Finally, the chapter discusses the DSM-5’s elimination of the bereavement exclusion in the criteria for major depression and its implications for psychiatric diagnosis.

The concluding chapter surveys the arc of answers observers have provided to questions about the division between sanity and madness, the resemblances and distinctions of mental and physical illnesses, and the causes of and treatments for mental illnesses. It considers the extent to which current conceptions of mental disorders represent advances or, in some cases, regressions compared to historical understandings. It ends by speculating about future possible developments in responses to mental health and illness and in the psychiatric profession.

All societies have grappled with questions about the nature of mental illness, its commonalities with and differences from physical illness, and the forces that cause and might overcome it. Examining the changing answers they have provided allows us to see the extent to which current explanations surpass or are equivalent to—or in some cases, are even deficient compared to—prior understandings.

## Notes

[1.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0016)Murphy, 1972.

[2.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0017)[Cawte, 1974](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-67), 56–57.

[3.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0018)Jaspers, 1946, quoted in [Shorter, 2015](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-525), 122.

[4.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0019)[Kessler et al., 2003a](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-299); [https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/mental-illness.shtml](https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/mental-illness.shtml.).

[5.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0020)[Moffitt et al., 2010](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-407).

[6.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0021)[Rohde et al., 2013](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-482).

[7.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0022)[World Health Organization, 2001](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-616), 37.

[8.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0023)E.[g. Rosen, 1968](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-485); [Porter, 1997](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-456).

[9.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0024)[Rosen, 1968](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-485), 67.

[10.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0025)[Goffman, 1971](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-183), 356.

[11.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0026)[Edgerton, 1969](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-114), 59.

[12.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0028)[American Psychiatric Association (APA), 2013](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-12), 20.

[13.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0029)[Wakefield, 1992](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-585) 1999. See also [Klein, 1999](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-309).

[14.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0030)[Jackson, 1986](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-265), 45.

[15.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0031)Griesinger, 2000, 226.

[16.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0032)<https://www.additudemag.com/michael-phelps-adhd-advice-from-the-olympians-mom/>.

[17.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0033)[Wakefield, 1999](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-586).

[18.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0034)[Layton et al., 2018](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-341). Phelps was born on June 30; he would have been about ten months younger than the oldest students in his class.

[19.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0035)APA, 2013, 697–700.

[20.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0036)[Spitzer & Wakefield, 2002](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-542).

[21.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0037)[Grant, 1978](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-191), 32.

[22.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0038)[Green, 2002](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-193), 467.

[23.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0039)See especially [Cosmides & Tooby, 1999](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-85).

[24.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0040)[Kendell, 1986](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-286), 25.

[25.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0041)The distress or disability requirement emerged out of the controversy, recounted in [Chapter 6](12_chapter6.xhtml#med-9780190907860-chapter-6) of this volume, over whether homosexuality should be seen as a mental disorder. The outcome was to eliminate homosexuality from the diagnostic manual unless it was “regularly accompanied by subjective distress and/or ‘some generalized impairment in social effectiveness of functioning’ ” ([Bayer, 1981](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-27), 127). This solution was illogical because if homosexuality was not a dysfunction, it could not be a mental disorder regardless of the degree of disability or disability it entailed. Later psychiatric manuals completely excised this condition from consideration as a mental disorder.

[26.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0042)E.g. Wakefield, [1992](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-585); [2006](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-588).

[27.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0043)It is, of course, possible that people who deny they have a serious mental illness are correct.

[28.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0044)[Jamison, 1993](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-266).

[29.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0046)[Benedict, 1934](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-37), 60.

[30.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0047)[Benedict, 1934](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-37), 79.

[31.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0048)In fact, Benedict’s own work indicates that at least some of the shamans she described had seriously impairing dysfunctions. She notes that Siberian shamans could be “violently insane for several years, others irresponsible to the point where they have to be watched constantly lest they wander off in the snow and freeze to death, others ill and emaciated to the point of death, sometimes with bloody sweat” ([Benedict, 1934](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-37), 62).

[32.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0049)[Garbowsky, 1989](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-172).

[33.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0050)Ego-dystonic homosexuality appeared in the DSM-III in 1980 but was removed from the next edition of the DSM in 1986.

[34.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0051)Although the DSM uses the statistical term “expectable” to distinguish appropriate from disordered conditions, “explicable” seems to more accurately convey the intended meaning. See [Busfield, 2011](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-61), 155.

[35.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0052)[Kleinman, 2012](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-311), 608.

[36.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0053)[Kleinman, 2012](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-311), 608.

[37.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0054)[Kendler, 2008](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-290).

[38.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0055)[Wakefield & First, 2013](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-592).

[39.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0056)APA, 2013, 271–72.

[40.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0057)[Edgerton, 1966](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-113), 419, italics in original.

[41.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0058)<https://www.upi.com/FBI-docs-reveal-Sandy-Hook-shooters-interest-in-mass-murder/4481508889851/>.

[42.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0059)<https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2014/03/peter-lanza-adams-father-newtown-shooting>.

[43.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0060)APA, 2013, 248.

[44.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0061)Alan Gregg, quoted in [Whooley, 2019](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-609), 120.

[45.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0062)[Sadler, 2013a](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-496), 455.

[46.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0063)E.g. [Wakefield, Kirk, & Pottick, 2006](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-594).

[47.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0064)[Ghaemi, 2013](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-176), 811.

[48.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0065)[Horwitz, 1982](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-244); [Wakefield, 1999](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-586), 379.

[49.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0066)The DSM-5 criteria for adjustment disorder provide a notable exception. This condition arises after a stressor and terminates within six months of the stressor, virtually the definition of a contextually appropriate response (APA, 2013, 286–87).

[50.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0067)[Wakefield, 1999](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-586).

[51.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0068)Freidson, 1970, 208.

[52.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0069)Quoted in [Porter, 2002](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-457), 37.

[53.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0070)[U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1999](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-577).

[54.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0071)[Rosenberg, 2007](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-487), 13.

[55.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0072)APA, 1994, xxi. Similarly, mental health advocacy groups encourage the use of language such as “a person with schizophrenia” instead of “a schizophrenic” to separate disorders from the individuals who have them. E.g. <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK333029/>.

[56.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0073)Quoted in [Shorter, 1992](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-520), 181.

[57.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0074)[Kraepelin, 1919](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-321).

[58.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0075)[Szasz, 1961](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-557).

[59.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0076)Quoted in [Scull, 2015](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-510), 171.

[60.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0077)[Churchland, 1984](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-72), 145.

[61.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0078)E.g. [Freud, 1900](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-142)/1965, 1905/1962.

[62.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0079)E.g. Beck, [1967](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-32), [1991](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-33).

[63.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0080)See especially [Porter, 2018](17_bibliography.xhtml#med-9780190907860-bibliography-1-bibItem-458).

[64.](07_chapter1.xhtml#n0081)E.g. Conley & Fletcher, 2018.
